+++
author = "Daryl Walleck"
title = "The Importance of being able to tell your story"
date = "2019-03-10"
description = ""
tags = [
    "Interviews"
]
draft = true
+++

For me, interviews are mostly an anxiety-ridden experience. I'm talking to
someone I don't know. I have no idea what kinds of technical questions I might
be asked (Thanks LeetCode!). However, there a few minutes of every interview
that I know to expect and have never feared: "Tell me a little bit about
yourself". Ha! I know the answer to this question! This is the moment where I
off the cuff talk about my work history and the projects I've worked on. Easy
as pie. That's what I thought anyway.

After being laid off earlier this year, I became very familiar with the
interview process after not having interviewed for quite awhile. As I started
interviewing and not having positive results, most of the areas for improvement
were obvious: more LeetCode to re-aquaint myself with algoritms and more time
studying application architecture to handle systems interviews. The solution
for these issues was straightforward: more studying and more practice.

I reached a level of confidence that I was happy with at the same time that a
new opportunity appeared for what I thought would be a dream job for me. I
passed the initial screening with a few bumps and did fairly well during my
virtual onsite. Deep down I felt like I had finally stuck the landing. I didn't.

I wanted to go down the deep spiral of shame, but instead I convinced myself to
play back this set of interviews in my head and examine where I might have
fallen short. In one case I had took a wrong turn with a technical problem and
tried to get back on track but I ran out of time. The other interviews I felt
like I had aced. So where did I go wrong?

I was out walking when an idea finally hit me: was it my introduction? My gut
reaction was no. I'm a very talkative and friendly person, and I certainly like
to tell stories. My inner monologue came back with an insight: "But are you
telling the _right_ story?". That thought literally stopped me in my tracks.
When asked about my work history, the answer I give is always off the cuff.
Having been in the industry for almost 14 years there's alot of ground to cover,
so there's a lot of picking and chosing what aspects of my career I have the
time to talk about. And I was doing this all on the spot without giving it
another thought, while I was spending months raising the bar on my technical
skills. Well fudge. While I never recieved any feedback from interviewers to
back up that insight (or any feedback really), it made sense that it could at
least be part of the problem. Giving a directionless, rambling answer about my
experience could at the very least not highlight my skills and achievements,
and at worst could not convey who I am and what I've accomplished. By bouncing
between topics, I could be seen as evasive or only giving a very high level view
of myself and my skills. I was being myself, but I wasn't presenting myself.
That sent down a new path of trying to better communicate who I am, what are
my personality traits, what my beliefs and strengths are, what is important to
me, and all the other bits that make me who I am. That leads us here, to this
blog post.

While it is important to be able to tell your story in an engaging manner, its
critical that you tell a story that highlights the most important part of your
history.